So the house that you're living in now was part of the estate, the Billit's estate, is that right?
Yes indeed.
Yeah, built when?
This one's 1868. So they seem to have building periods with the various estates.
The land here is quite unusual because effectively there's only been three
three ownerships of the land since the dissolution.
Eventually the crown sold off the land here to a chap called William Fowler who was from Shrewsbury,
he was the provost of Shrewsbury, quite an important man on the council of the marches,
and he was a serial buyer of monastic land. He lived at a place called Harnage Grange in
Shropshire which was formerly part of Bedford's survey, and he bought in 1665.
His family, his successors, were here tottering on and his estate eventually collapsed about 1820.
Then Thomas Wilson came who was a London solicitor, seemed to be quite a go-ahead sort of chap,
and what we can see from the records got himself into a deal with Lord Portman to build a market
in what we would now call Portman Street in London, and went bankrupt. So he went off to
Australia to Adelaide where he became, he was the second mayor of Adelaide, so he made a new
life for himself, very successful, and we still have some contact with his descendants in Australia,
and that's a nush within the Phillips family who were mill owners in Stockport, and they were here
until 1959 when this property was sold out of the estate. The two houses were sold and bought by
a well-known local character called Mercer Griffiths who lived in the house next door to me,
and she bought both houses. He bought one because she wanted some accommodation for her parents,
and she thought she might live in the other one. Well, this one was £350
because it had a bit more land next door which was only £300. That's the history of these two houses.
The build time is the 1860s which was quite significant because the Phillips were
obviously very proactive on the estate at that time, which was certainly not true of
many of the years when the Fowlers were here. The estate seemed to be very badly managed from
about 1750 onwards and went into a long, long period of decline, but the Phillips were
initially absent landlords, most of them were absentee landlords most of the time, and they
really dropped to grips from the 1850s onwards, and they did a lot of building and rebuilding.
The first estate houses they built were the Lye who went on to comprise
their little pairs of cottages.
They would go back to 1840s shortly after they arrived, but their main expansion seemed to have
been in the 1860s when they built schools, they built three pairs of houses like this,
this pair which eventually became Piccadilly. I'm not quite sure why Piccadilly, except that
I think they had connections with what I suspect they had a London home in Piccadilly because two
of their children were christened in St James's Church Piccadilly, Paddock down near the Union,
and the Cymdee cottage, if you come across Cymdee cottage up at the back end of the valley,
up towards Brookersany, that's been converted into a single house.
These were 1860s. What was the purpose of the estate building for workers presumably?
For workers, yes, certainly these were quite large by the standards of the time.
The Wernock cottage and Lye cottage was another pair of cottages as you see coming into the village.
It's now one, were very small. At one time there was about 12 people living in one of the Lye
cottages which is two up, two down, no privy up the backs of the thing, so it was relatively basic.
But these were better. Also in the 1850s they rebuilt the Abbey farms, it was known,
which we now call Home Farm, and that was the model farm for the estate and there were all
the best practices of agriculture were on display there. There's a splendid range of buildings,
coach house, coachman's accommodation, stabling, etc etc, wonderful buildings, but sadly
not fit for purpose anymore for modern agriculture.